---
toc: true
layout: post
description: "With practical steps on how to be kind to your future self."
categories: ["PhD"]
title: "Why PhD Students Self-sabotage: An Opinionated Guide to PhD Writing"
image: images/2020-10-30-phd_guide_files/sab_bike.png
badges: true
comments: true
hide: true
search_exclude: true
permalink: /phd_writing/
---



# Introduction

As a PhD student or academic, writing is a core element of the job. In order to succeed, you need to be a productive writer. However, completing a PhD is by no means easy and I can attest to some of the self-sabotaging behaviours that will be mentioned in this post. Half of the reason I wrote this is to summarise a bunch of tips I've come across for my future self because I know I will need to be reminded of them. The other half is to put this out for other PhD students and academics in the hopes it is useful. 


Sometimes people think they should write when they are "ready" and need to read endlessly or conduct more experiments. Ironically, this makes them less likely to write and more confused. And sometimes people think they should understand the material first and then write but in practice, after writing, they find that there were inconsistencies and certain parts didn't flow well - signs that they didn't understand the material coherently in the first place. According to this [Nature article](https://www.nature.com/articles/nj7354-129a),
> In fact, writing clarifies your thinking. Writing is not recording - you don't just take a photocopy of what is in your head and put it on the page. It is a far more creative and interactive process. As you write, you develop your thoughts. Writing is, in fact, rigorous thinking. Writing means putting new words on the page or substantially rewriting old words.



# Self-Sabotaging Behaviours
Kearns {% fn 1 %}

## Overcommitting
> Taking on so many things that your high priority goals suffer

## Busyness
> Looking like you are very busy but, in reality, only less important things are actually getting done

## Perfectionism
> Setting unrealistic and impossible expectations

## Procrastination
> Putting off important or necessary tasks, often until the last minute

## Disorganisation
> Not developing a routine or system that makes managing your time and life easier

## Not Putting in Effort
> Not practising or trying very hard

## Choosing Performace Debilitating Circumstances
> Trying to work in a busy or unsuitable location or situation



## Binge Writing or Snack Writing

When possible,
try snack writing first thing in the morning.
Our experience suggests that this increases the
chances of success by minimizing distractions
and ensuring that you have sufficient energy to
write clever things. However, for snack writing
to lead to really high-quality results, you also
need to write in a very specific way. 

Big blocks hardly ever come, and when they do, usually not get used productively. 
and that research shows that getting into the habit of writing regularly in small chunks (as Gardiner and Kearns calls "snack writing") increases productivity.

# What Writing Is Not
Writing isn’t editing: you should not spend
your brief snack-writing time trying to find
the perfect word or getting your grammar
right. Writing isn’t reading journal articles for
research: write first and read afterwards, so
that your writing shows you what you need
to read. Writing isn’t referencing: when you
make that killer argument and want to reference Smith and Brown (2006; or maybe it
was 2007?), don’t stop and look it up. Write
“Smith & Brown (200??)” and keep going.
You can look up the reference later. Furthermore, writing is not formatting, literature
searching, photocopying, e-mailing or
nosing around on Facebook. Writing — at
least for your snack-writing sessions —
means putting new words on the page or
substantially rewriting existing words. 



# Ergonomics

This tip was inspired by https://www.fast.ai/2020/08/06/ergonomics/

If you are feeling uncomfortable, then you are certainly not going to feel comfortable writing for extended periods of time. You don't want to damage your neck, back, arms by having poor posture. Ideally, you want your screen at approximately eye height to prevent straining the neck and this pretty much means raising your monitor if you haven't already. Using textbooks, pads of paper, or boxes is cheap way to do so. For those who use a laptop, you can raise your display and use a separate keyboard and mouse. If you don't have a dedicated office space and need to move your workstation around, you use a box to raise your laptop screen and use it to store your keyboard and mouse as you move. You can even use your rolled up backpack in replacement of said box. For the keyboard, you want your elbows approximately perpendicular to your torso as you type.

I've used the large boxes Amazon ships me to make a standing desk setup. Standing can become uncomfortable after a long time so I find it helpful to transition between standing an sitting every so often. 

Being uncomfortable will distract you from writing so consider how this might work for you. You don't need an expensive motorised table, fancy laptop stands, etc to get started. 



# Touch Typing

You will spend hours... days... years typing so it's definitely worth your time learning how to touch type. It also helps with ergonomics since you don't need to look at your keyboard anymore. A good typist can get over 100 words per minute but in practice, unless you are transcribing, you don't need to be this fast. I find it good enough to type at thought speed. 
I trained by going through a dictionary and typing *many* words but you can train in other ways. For example, those playing fast paced online multiplayer games get really good at typing to communicate with team members and asking for assistance as the situation calls for it. 

As a side note, I don't remember what some of my passwords are because it's in muscle memory! My fingers know what it is and to work it out (say if I needed the password on my phone), I have to visualise a keyboard and play back where my fingers go. 

It's bizzare that I still see academics hunt and peck as they type. For a job that requires writing papers and answering many emails, I think it's definitely a good investment to increase your typing speed. 



# Back Up Your Work Regularly and Use Version Control

I remember a day in the past, I lost a day of work because I forgot to save a Word document. I was devestated for about 10 minutes before smashing the report out again because it was due that day. That was stressful! You don't want this to happen to you when writing your thesis so back up your work regularly.

I now use Overleaf to write my reports/papers and it saves *as you type* so you don't lose a second of work. It's the Google Docs for LaTeX and also integrates with git for version control. 

For software projects, I use GitHub and this is great for text files (since you check a diff for every commit) but also works for saving binary files. The advantage of using a version control system is the ability to roll back changes, and try experiments in a separate branch before merging with the master branch. This is great for collaboration where your team may be working on the same code base but separate modules. 



# Zero days

# your 3 selves




# opinioned guide to ML


# tesla dir blog


# how to do good research




# Writing Group





# Organisation
4 quadrants


# Prolific writers

Brandon Sanderson
progress bars.

# Writing excuses podcast

"You're out of excuses. Now go write."



# References

{{ 'Kearns, H., Gardiner, M. and Marshall, K., 2008. Innovation in PhD completion: The hardy shall succeed (and be happy!). Higher Education Research & Development, 27(1), pp.77-89.' | fndetail: 1 }}
